Country Selection (up to 2,000 characters, including spaces and punctuation)

France is the best match for my project because Paris is a hub for
change-point detection research. My host Charles Truong is an
internationally renowned expert who has published several research
papers in the area of change-point detection algorithms, and he has
published a widely used Python open-source software package. We began
communicating with each other on the web, with regards to his
software, and we met in person for the first time in Summer 2022, when
I gave a research talk in his lab in Paris, and he participated in the
invited session that I organized at the Institute for Mathematical
Statistics meeting in London. We have not yet collaborated on research
papers, but we have discussed the potential for collaboration for some
time, so a Fulbright award now would facilitate our working together
for the first time, on new state-of-the-art algorithms and software
for change-point detection in large data sequences.

My previous experiences, in graduate school, and in research
collaborations since then, have prepared me to undertake my project in
France. In particular, I did both my Master and PHD in Paris
(2008-2012), where I collaborated with researchers at the Institut
Curie on change-point detection algorithms for large genomic data,
with applications to childhood cancer diagnosis. Since then, I have
been working in Japan (2013), Canada (2014-2018) and USA
(2018-present) while continuing this line of research in about 10
collaborative papers with French colleagues (with several short visits
to France since 2012). Furthermore, I am fluent in French since 2009,
and I practice French every day with my Canadian wife who is a native
French speaker.

Career Trajectory (up to 1,500 characters, including spaces and punctuation)

My career path started with undergraduate and Master level study in
Statistics, then became more computational during my PHD, which I did
in two Machine Learning research labs, with advisors Jean-Philippe
Vert (Ecole des Mines, Institut Curie) and Francis Bach (INRIA,
ENS). My post-docs were focused on developing new change-point
detection algorithms for large genomic data sets, for which I
developed substantial expertise and an international reputation. Since
my current professor job at NAU SICCS, I have published several new
machine learning research papers about change-point detection
algorithms, but I have also begun research projects in several
different areas (microbiome interaction detection, image segmentation,
deep learning, etc). I am already an internationally renowned expert
in change-point detection, as evidenced by invitations to talk on this
subject at recent conferences (for example, Joint Statistical Meetings
2023 in Toronto). A future goal is to write a textbook about
computational methods for change-point detection, and this Fulbright
award would help me to achieve this goal by allowing me to continue
work on change-point detection algorithms, with a new collaborator
that will certainly share a unique perspective, with new data sets and
new research directions, that will be useful for my future textbook
project.

Cultural Preparation (up to 2,000 characters, including spaces and punctuation)

    Please address your familiarity with the host culture, and any other global experiences that prepare you to adjust successfully to life in the host country.

I am very familiar with the culture in France, as I have lived there
for over four years, during my Master and PHD (2008-2012). I am
Francophile, meaning that I love French cuisine, visual arts, music,
etc. I am fluent in French and I have been continuously practicing
French since 2009. I lived in Montreal (2014-2018) where the official
language is French, and I married a French-speaking Canadian, with
whom I practice French every day. I know how to search for housing in
Paris, and I know how to get around there on public transport or
bike. Therefore I anticipate no problem at all in adjusting
successfully to life in France.

From previous experience, a challenge is the French visa system. In
the past, even if I submitted all required paper work on time, the
French system would often not be able to get me my official documents
on time (for example, carte de s√©jour). To address this challenge, I
plan to do the visa paper work as soon as I am notified about the
Fulbright award, and I hope the people at Fulbright can help simplify
the process in some way.

I am outgoing, extroverted, adaptable, flexible, and culturally
sensitive, so I would be an ideal cultural ambassador for the US in
Paris. For example, I have been living married to a French Canadian
since 2014, and I am sensitive and adaptable to our differences in
culture. Another example is that I have maintained friendships with
French people in Paris, who often invite me to social activities, and
even to sleep at their houses, if I come to visit. Finally, my
collegiality is evidence by my continued collaborations with French
colleagues, with whom I have written several research papers on the
subject of change-point detection algorithms.

Teaching Preparation (only required if your award activity includes teaching) (up to 1,500 characters, including spaces and punctuation)

    How will you make your teaching relevant to the culture(s) and language(s) of the host country?

Almost all of my teaching materials are written in English, and in my
experience, most researchers in the Paris region have a good
understanding of written English. When I give a lecture for a
French-native audience, I typically begin by asking whether they would
prefer if I speak in French or English, and in the past I have given
lectures in French. I also invite members of the audience to ask
questions in French, if they prefer. In all lectures (even with native
English speaking audiences), when I am asked a question, I verbally
repeat the question, to ensure that I have understood, before I
attempt to answer the question. If necessary, I could also translate
written materials from English to French. Finally, in casual
conversation with colleagues and students (for example, over coffee or
lunch, not in a lecture), most people prefer to speak French, in my
experience, and it will be my pleasure to speak French on these
occasions.

