---
layout: post
title: True reproducibility in R 
description: The switchr package and manifests
---

Reproducible research is important for science. In an ideal world,
every research publication would have accompanying data and code that
could be used to re-do the analyses in the paper (including the
figures and tables).

However, in practice, not many papers do have accompanying data and
code. Even if a paper does have data and code online (as I do for each
of my papers), it may be difficult to re-do the analyses, because the
versions of the software used may have changed.

In R this is especially problematic, since the main package repository
CRAN only officially supports installation of the most recent version
of each package. I developed the
[requireGitHub](https://github.com/tdhock/requireGitHub) R package to
partially solve this problem. It facilitates use of any version of any
R package which is on GitHub.

Today I read an article that goes one step further, and is really
important work towards truly reproducible research using R. In [Enhancing
Reproducibility and Collaboration via Management of R Package
Cohorts](https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v082i01), Becker et al
propose a reproducible research system for R based on "manifests,"
which generalize package repositories. In their results section, they
use their [switchr](https://github.com/gmbecker/switchr) package to
reproduce a result from the [DESeq
paper](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/gb-2010-11-10-r106),
even though the versions of R and all of the packages they used have
changed!